hello welcome to topcast this is not a
new look
for me i'm just doing a very quick
piece to camera i suppose a little vlog
about an article that was
in the scientific american
a couple of days ago i've only just read
it and i just thought i'd respond off
the cuff rather than preparing anything
lengthy about it
so let's just read through it and see
what we think
okay so here's the article
it's by a couple of people down here
written june 20th 2021 and it's called
the delusion of infinite economic
growth so delusion
that all automatically implies some kind
of
psychological disorder so they're
presuming that this
is not the the idea of infinite economic
growth
is not something that might be argued
for from a scientific standpoint
or from an economic standpoint or any
kind of objective standpoint
but rather it's some kind of mental
malady
so here's our first problem now
who are the two people that are writing
this
now we can't judge people
based upon their backgrounds but
these two people happen to be physicists
and we can go to the end of the article
to find out
that one of them happens to be a climate
physicist
and works in meteorology and another one
is a professor of physics
working on transdisciplinary climate
pedagogy so i
guess that means something to the effect
of teaching climate science
okay so anyway whatever the case they're
both physicists
now the thing is that
there is such a thing as expertise and
no doubt these two people
are experts in physics
how does that qualify them to be experts
in economics or financial matters now
i'm not an expert and do not pretend to
be an expert in economics
or in financial matters but i do
recognize that there is such a thing as
expertise in this area and so i've taken
time to read
economists like thomas sol to listen
to financial experts like euron brook
and various other people and so i've
learned over time
that people opining off the cuff
about economic matters
seem just as silly sometimes as people
who have absolutely no
knowledge whatsoever of physics but send
prominent physicists their ideas for how
to improve upon einstein
even though their background might be
civil engineering
or no science at all but they think that
they can disprove einstein many
physicists
know this feeling this is the sense that
i got as i read this article it read to
me
like cranks it read to me kind of like
people who know absolutely nothing
whatsoever about economics or the
arguments for
infinite economic growth and i know that
the arguments for infinite economic
growth are not made very often
there's very few of us who do make this
even people who
are against strange socialist marxist
tribal ideas ancient tribal ideas even
those
ostensibly on our side in the battle of
ideas
don't think that something like
literally infinite
growth is possible that growth can just
continue
off into the infinite future okay but
let's just read through okay i won't
spend too
long ranting on this but i just thought
it would be informative
to read through it paragraph by
paragraph and see where the errors are
the philosophical errors the
epistemological errors so they begin
even sustainable technologies such as
electric vehicles and wind turbines
face unbreachable physical limits and
exact
grave environmental costs well of course
they're going yes so
immediately yes of course there's going
to be
physical limits on technologies
grave environmental costs well there's a
grave environmental costs
for not embracing embracing the latest
technologies we need
to have technology in order to protect
ourselves from the environment a point
i've made
over and over again that there is there
is pollution out there
that is forever trying to get into our
waterways
the the natural world is just a
polluted sphere of germs and
viruses and chemicals that are not good
for us
and so that's why we need filtration
that's why we need antiseptics that's
why we need antivirals and vaccines
these things constitute pollutants in
the environment
that are dangerous for living organisms
and especially for us
and it is interesting of course we can
immediately see here that even the
environmentalists are warring amongst
themselves so
you know no true scotsman this is you
know that
that they're having a go at people on
their own side so if you think that
you're doing good
by embracing electric vehicles and you
think you're doing good by embracing
green energy we're not good enough
you're not good enough well how can you
be better how can you be more pure
the electric vehicle ev has become one
of the great
modern symbols of a world awakened to
the profound
challenges of unsustainability and
climate change
so much so that we may well imagine that
deep thoughts answered today to life the
universe and everything
might plausibly be evie but as douglas
adams would surely have asked if
electric vehicles are the answer
what is the question okay i'm kind of
i'm kind of thinking at this point that
you know
maybe it's this article's written by the
fossil fuel industry who knows um
let's keep going let us imagine the
perfect ev
solar powered efficient reliable and
affordable but is it
sustainable ev's powered by renewable
energy may help reduce the carbon
footprint of transport
yet the measure of sustainability is not
merely the carbon footprint but the
material footprint
the aggregate quantity of biomass metal
oils construction
minerals and fossil fuels used during
production and consumption of a product
the approximate metric ton weight of an
electric vehicle constitutes materials
such as metals including rare earths
plastics glass and rubber therefore a
global spike in the demand for evs
would drive an increased demand for each
of these minerals end quote
of course of course and isn't that a
wonderful thing isn't it wonderful that
we have the knowledge to
turn those otherwise completely useless
resources
metal ores biomass
oil into this amazing thing this this
vehicle
uh powered by electricity that can
accelerate faster than
you know usually combustion vehicles are
the same the same kind
the idea of sustainable they mention
sustainable they're going to keep
mentioning sustainable
let's just recall this idea of
sustainability as
explained in the beginning of infinity
now sustainable means
in one sense to keep things the same
to to ensure that change doesn't happen
over time you just sustain something
so it's the same day after day after day
and if you can't do that then of course
if the thing doesn't remain the same day
after day after day
then it's not sustainable but we
people cannot possibly remain
the same day after day after day we want
to make progress we want to solve our
problems
the world is not going to remain the
same the world is not sustainable
so the other meaning of sustainable is
of course to provide what something
needs to sustain it to keep it going
what we need
what we need what we humans need is
constant change
so this is why there's this weird
paradox within the
meaning of the word there on the one
hand
keep things keep things the same the day
after day after day but the very thing
that we need is not to keep things the
same day after day after day and indeed
not every other animal by the way can't
remain the same day after day after day
because the environment changes
the environment necessarily changes the
universe is in flux it's changing all
the time
eventually the asteroid will be coming
or the equivalent of an asteroid a virus
or something else
something unknown at the moment
and that situation won't be sustainable
but i think these people these
these pessimistic anti-technology people
these people are against the use let's
just say
exploitation of resources they
are for the extinction
of people they think people are bad they
think people are
destroying the planet and nothing is
further from the truth we're trying to
actually
keep the planet going so it's worth
living in
because the planet is not caring if it
had a will at all if you were to if you
were to
ascribe a will to the planet it's trying
to
destroy itself and to destroy all of the
other species on it after all it's
cooling down
it's invariably cooling down the center
of the earth is cooling down it's
becoming
geologically less active over time and
meanwhile the sun is getting hotter so
it's becoming more and more hostile over
time
to the life that exists here right now
as it always has
it has periodically just caused the
extinction of massive species over and
over again
the planet the planet is not a friendly
place we have to make it
we have to eke out our existence on here
okay let's keep going
every stage of the life cycle of any
manufactured product exacts
environmental costs
habitat destruction biodiversity loss
and pollution including
carbon emissions from the extraction of
water materials manufacturing
construction through to disposal
thus it is the increasing global
material footprint that is fundamentally
the reason for the twin
climate ecological crises okay so
pausing there
is not a climate or ecological crisis
neither of those things are true
um if anything both the climate
and ecology is in a better position that
it ever has been throughout the
geological history of the earth
because precisely because people are
here solving the problems for it
there are just so many people on this
planet now concerned about the climate
that they are doing everything they can
in order to
sustain the climate at present levels as
if
as if that's a good thing knowing full
well that the climate has
changed over time by natural processes
now that we are here however we should
want to
keep the climate in a state
that is suitable for us and often to the
infinite future we should hope to
have a climate that is rather like our
own climate inside of our houses i've
got climate control inside of my house
i can turn the temperature down when i
want and turn the temperature up when i
want wouldn't it be wonderful if we
could do that
locally in certain places turn the
temperature up where we want to
have crops growing more efficiently and
turn the temperature down
in places where we'd like to go snow
skiing for example wouldn't that be
wonderful that's the kind of climate
i would like to sustain and to control
as for ecological crises
when hasn't there been this ecological
crisis that people are solving these
things
all of those things biodiversity lot how
much biodiversity loss would there be
without people trying to
create the knowledge in order to save
these animals and plants all of these
so-called problems by the way are simply
the result
of enacting solutions to far worse
problems
far worse problems insofar as you think
that
carbon emissions are a problem the
problem
that existed prior to any kind of carbon
emissions from a
man-made factory car
coal-fired power station etc etc
that problem was the problem of of
surviving without
electricity the comforts of a
fossil fuel industry that provide
housing and
clothing and all of that stuff the
problem of not being able to get from
here to there fast enough the problem
of not being able to cook your food
efficiently the problem of not being
able to feed all the people on the
planet
so we solve those problems more or less
okay we're
99 of the way there okay it used to be
the case that you know whatever i don't
know
90 of people were starving then it went
to 50
then it went to 30. and now we've got
about i think at most
we could find one percent of people on
this planet starving if that
i think i'm being generous there but
along with solving these problems these
really important problems
the problem of transportation the
problem of food the problem of housing
the problem of clothing
all of which is solved by fossil fuel
industry
solved by burning certain fossil fuels
of burning oil of burning coal of
creating things
out of that oil yes we create some other
problems
which are better problems okay we've got
a little bit of pollution to deal with
perhaps
hey i don't like breathing in grimy air
so we've got that problem let's try and
get that grime that those nasty
nitrous oxides and sulfur dioxides out
of the air great
and make the air look nice and clean
take the carbon dioxide
out too if you want plant more trees
get some more carbonating bacteria do
some carbon sequestration if you want to
do that
great that is a minor problem in the
scheme of things
in the great scheme of things we keep
being told that the the great
catastrophe is coming
the great catastrophe has already been
avoided to a large extent
the great catastrophe of the past of
people of people
literally starving to death and freezing
to death because
there wasn't enough food there wasn't
enough shelter there wasn't enough
clothing
there wasn't enough wealth to to change
their
situation okay let's keep on going
and they write the global material
footprint has grown in lockstep with the
exponentially
rising global economy since the
industrial revolution okay so that's a
good thing i don't know if they think
it's a good thing but it's not wonderful
that the
the global economy has risen
exponentially
this is largely because of egregious
consumption egregious
egregious consumption by the super
affluent in a socio-economic system
founded on growth without limits well
here we go
we're getting a tell here they're
automatically they're having a go at the
rich
that's who they come for coming for the
um the socio-economic system so they
want to get rid of the socio-economic
system what
socio-economic capitalism of course what
do they want instead they want
communism okay they might not say it out
loud it's a dirty word
that's what they want that's what
they're going to be arguing for
they go on to say can we resolve this
fundamental conflict between the quest
for limitless growth
and the consequent environmental
destruction
okay the environment is the universe
okay let's just get that straight the
environment is not merely
the forest in the amazon which is what
people think of or the oceans or the air
the environment is the universe it is
limitless
as far as the cosmologists know and the
astrophysicist it's limitless there's no
bound to it
and we can just keep spreading out and
insofar as it's
not limitless it's effectively so people
a trillion years hence might have to
worry about some of the
absolute limits of what physics tells us
that the universe is going to be like
once it expands to a certain size
we don't need to worry about it right
now let them they'll create the
knowledge of what to do then
but for now we have the ability to
create limitless growth and one reason
is because
we have limitless resources why
because a resource isn't a resource
until you have the knowledge of how to
exploit it
lots of examples of this exist the one
that i've used before is
pitch blend pitch blend is the name of a
rock it's an
ore that exists in various places around
the world in particular in the northern
territory of australia
for millennia that rock sat in the
ground completely inert doing nothing
for anybody ever
then physicists of the 20th century
figured out atomic physics nuclear
physics
they figured out that uranium could be
used in order to generate heat
inside of nuclear reactors and so they
created nuclear reactors which used
exploited uranium where do you find
uranium in pitch blender among other
places
cool now that pitch blend which was
either too useless
it wasn't a resource previously it
wasn't a resource because no one knew
how to use it
only after only after nuclear physics
were we able to exploit that were we
able to extract the uranium
out of that ore and then actually turn
it into something useful
a resource is only a resource in the
context
of knowledge which allows you to know
that it's a resource
how many other bits of the earth
otherwise useless at the moment
will become resources in the future
because some smart person figures out
how to use it
much less the rest of the solar system
and galaxy and universe substances
out there that if we can properly
exploit them
make the world better for millions
billions and eventually trillions
more people this is what we should want
this is what we should want to do
of course in the future what we'll have
is this thing called the universal
constructor which will be able to take
any atoms at all that you like as long
as you've got the elements there
and just rearrange them into whatever
product you want
okay perhaps an interstellar spaceship
let's keep going
enter technology technological
innovation and efficiency improvements
are often cited as pathways to decouple
growth in material use from economic
growth
while technology undoubtedly has a
crucial role to play in the transition
to a sustainable world
it is constrained by fundamental
physical principles and pragmatic
economic considerations
okay what do they mean by a transition
to a sustainable world
a world that remains the same year after
year after year
i don't think they think it through i
don't think anyone really thinks this
through that talks about sustainability
the world is not going to sit there
for you remaining the same over time
that's not sustainable it's not
sustainable for us as i say
not only is the asteroid coming
eventually and we better want to have
the knowledge in time to deflect it we
probably already do
but although some people keep on arguing
against rich people like elon musk
having the technology having the wealth
to actually be able to do something like
deflect an asteroid if it was on a
collision course with the earth
but forget asteroids we just got through
an
18-month long pandemic which really was
a minor pandemic
could you imagine if something was far
worse than covert 19
far more contagious far more deadly
would we have the wealth
and the knowledge to be able to deal
with that crisis we've already
spent spent so much wealth already on a
relatively minor crisis so imagine a
worse virus
imagine something that's not a virus
something that attacks the human body
that we
hear the two had no knowledge of
whatsoever you know these things have
arisen
prions are one you know over the years
who knows what might appear in the
future
or the equivalent of an asteroid what if
what if it wasn't an asteroid what if it
was a stray planet
um astronomers have talked about this
that that the stray planets might
actually
outnumber the planets that orbit around
stars for various reasons
or just other things that go flying
through the cosmos
or just the unknown how do we prepare
for the unknown we have to create
knowledge faster how do we create
knowledge faster by investing in
research
okay this isn't just research funded by
the government it's funded by
private enterprise creating new
technologies
how can they do this as fast as possible
having cheap energy
cheap fuel in order to power the
computers of the future
wealth so that people have the time to
be
creative wealth so that we can automate
almost everything that hitherto isn't
automated aside from the creative output
of people's brains
people assembling things in factories
should be thinking creatively they
should be doing something else
everyone driving a vehicle for a job
should be free instead
to be able to do something creative and
i think they all can forget about what
the pessimists say out there
people who think that not everyone can
be creative not everyone can be
intelligent not everyone can be a pro
rubbish
everyone can and would love to be would
absolutely love to be
do you think a truck driver would not
prefer to be
doing something else they would do you
think that someone who's assembling
something on an assembly line in a
factory wouldn't prefer to be doing
something creative
artistic intellectual they would it is a
strange ivory tower disconnected way of
viewing people
i don't know if these people don't
actually ever talk to people who are
involved in these jobs
who talk to check out cashiers who talk
to people in
mundane jobs that could be automated
they don't want to be doing those things
they'd rather be doing something else
in an extremely wealthy future they will
a future where they're allowed to
exploit their creativity a future where
their creativity can help solve their
own problems in their own life and the
problems for the rest of us as well
about how to exploit resources about how
to expand out beyond this planet because
we have to
it's not sustainable living on this
planet it's not sustainable at all
not only for us for the rest of the
animals and plants that you might care
about
if you care about panda bears then
perhaps in the future we can move the
panda bear somewhere else where it is
sustainable
to another planet okay this is off into
the distant future obviously
but we know it's not sustainable to
remain here scientifically it's not
sustainable if we keep things the same
here the sun
will heat up it will expand it will
engulf the earth that'll be the end of
us we know that's coming
and that is just one thing that we know
about happening
we can almost guarantee there will be
something unknown
something we cannot predict that will
come from the clear blue sky
we need to have a stance of knowledge
production and creation
we need to be able to exploit the
resources as fast as possible
the only thing that's sustainable the
only thing that's sustainable
is creating knowledge faster and faster
which requires
energy you need energy to power
knowledge production
let's keep on going examples abound
the energy efficiency of airplanes has
improved little for decades since they
have been operating close to the
theoretical peak efficiency
likewise there's a hard limit on the
efficiency of photovoltaic cells about
because the physical properties are
semiconductors that constitute them in
practice few exceed
20 for economic and pragmatic reasons
the power generation of large wind farms
is limited
to about 1 watt per square meter as a
simple yet unavoidable physical
consequence of wake effects
the awesome exponential increase in
computing power of the past five decades
will end by about 2025. since it is
physically impossible to take
transistors on a computer chip already
you're actually five percent
of the size of chronovirus much smaller
okay a few errors in here okay
well firstly yes absolutely this is an
interesting thing about thermodynamics
by the way uh
people might think you know recently
considering you know
combustion engines this is something
that you learn about when you do a
physics degree whatever the case
the interesting thing is you can't make
a combustion engine you can't make any
engine perfectly 100 efficient
indeed indeed the best that you can hope
for as they say there
for for combustion engines
uh yeah well i think it's about 40
something like that
and this is thermodynamics okay so yes
but what's the big deal
who care what what do they what do they
what's the concern here that physics is
somehow got it in for us that because
you're not allowed to have a more
efficient device that thermodynamics
puts a hard limit on these things
that somehow or other this is a reason
to perhaps stop building so many engines
as for this thing about um
the end of moore's law well yeah you
can't put
more transistors on a computer than
once the transistors get down to you
know the size of an atom literally once
you've got
transistors the size of an atom the
negative problem
if you're going to go through classical
computation unless of course you
increase the number of processes okay
moore's law hasn't been deviated from
that much if you just consider the
overall power of the computer perhaps if
you just
consider the speed of the processor
that's all a point
we have a theory of quantum computation
we already have
an avenue two we have a vision for
computers that are
vastly more powerful than any computer
that exists now so this pessimism
is undermined by david deutch's proof
of the theoretical possibility of
practically building
quantum computers okay we just have to
get through the engineering difficulties
of course if these people
have their way then powering the
research of the future
perhaps quantum computers might be very
energy intensive
goodness knows what will happen then
we'll have people protesting about the
building of quantum computers the very
thing that might solve the problems of
the future
might be protested away because people
are more concerned that
everyone has exactly the same access to
all the resources in the world
let's get going whether it is principles
of classical quantum or solid-state
physics or thermodynamics each places
different but
inexorable constraints on technological
solutions
no it doesn't no it doesn't i mean
yes there are things that are physically
possible and things that are physically
impossible
you can't make physically impossible
technology big deal
big deal that has no bearing whatsoever
on our ability to solve problems and
make progress off into the infinite
future
you can't build a rocket that goes
faster than the speed of light
but does that mean you can't get
anywhere in the galaxy no
in your rest frame okay you if you
travel close to the speed of light you
can get almost anywhere instantly
of course everyone else will see you
take you know hundreds of thousands of
years to get from here to there
that's relativity point is it doesn't
really place inexorable constraints on
technological solutions
a solution is only a solution if it's
physically possible
so forget that let's keep going
basically physical principles that have
allowed incredible technological leaps
over the past century
also inevitably limit them we might
consider that
extensive recycling of materials would
offset efficiency limits
recycling is crucial no it's not however
while glass and metals can be recycled
almost indefinitely without loss of
quality materials such as paper and
plastic can be recycled only a few more
times before
becoming too degraded okay just
on this point about recycling recycling
people people are overly concerned about
waste why
the the id more waste is a sign of a
healthy society now we don't want to be
living in a polluted city
we want the waste a long way away from
us buried in the ground or otherwise
available for
recycling it won't be far
into the future all of this will become
hope
okay as long as these people don't get
their way a century from now once again
if we have universal 3d printers okay
universal constructors of a kind
then they will be able to assemble
technology of any kind that you can come
up with a program
for the object to make including other
universal constructors
so the universal constructor will be
something like a 3d printer
that will be able to build any device
that you like
as long as you've got a program for it
you can program the computer
to get the universal constructor to
build the device okay the universal
constructor presumably is some kind of
robot which is assembling things
on a microscopic scale nanoscale perhaps
atom by atom
it can assemble something like a
computer or a quantum computer or a car
or a rocket whatever now when that thing
comes to the end of its natural life
because
physics causes things to degrade unless
of course you have universal
constructors within those things
constantly repairing them so they never
actually need to be thrown away but
let's say they didn't need to be thrown
away
then the universal constructor could be
a universal destructor and
just change all of that stuff back into
the
fundamental elements out of which it was
made in the first place
and presumably these universal
constructors of the future which are
physically possible
which will happen at some point perhaps
you don't even need a universal
such thing then we could use these
things in
our rubbish tips our garbage dumps
uh that we have today that would
otherwise be causing pollution of
groundwater or something whatever your
environmental concern you have
and change them back into harmless
materials
that aren't pollutants this can all be
fixed with technology the future
there are some problems now they need
solutions
the solution is not let's complain about
technology and slow down the rate of
progress
that is not the lesson here let's keep
going
additionally recycling itself may be an
energy and materials intensive process
even if physical laws could be broken
they cannot to achieve recycling with
efficiency added demand from the
imperative for economic growth would
necessarily require virgin materials
the key point is that efficiency is
limited by physics but there is no
sufficiency limit
on the so on the socio-economic
construct
of demand okay maybe these people are
actually on my side you know arguing
against
recycling i don't have anything against
recycling if people want to do recycling
and make money out of recycling that's
great
my concern is that quite often higher
quality and cheaper products can be made
from raw materials without having to
worry about recycling them
let's keep going unfortunately the
situation is even more dire economic
growth is required to be exponential
that is the size of the economy must
double in a fixed period
as referenced earlier this has driven a
corresponding increase in the material
footprint
to understand the nature of exponential
growth consider the
ev suppose that we have enough easily
extractable lithium for the batteries
needed to fuel the ev revolution for
another 30 years
now assume that deep sea mining provides
four times the current amount of these
minerals
materials are we covered for 120 years
no because the current 10 growth rate in
demand for lithium is equivalent to
doubling in demand every seven years
which means we would only have enough
for 44 years
in effect we could we would cause untold
perhaps irreversible devastation
of marine ecosystems to buy ourselves a
few extra years supply of raw materials
okay this is nothing but malthus's
error applied to lithium that's all that
is you know
these people who've argued for centuries
that for example it is clear and we can
do the mathematics let me show you
the finite space of land available
on planet earth for growing crops for
growing food is fixed
it's fixed there's a certain amount of
arable land and that's it that's that
but the population of the earth is
increasing exponentially
therefore there must come a time when we
will run out of arable land therefore
run out of food
the population will outstrip the food
supply this has always been wrong and
the reason it's been wrong is because
knowledge changes the calculus we learn
better ways about how to more
efficiently produce food
more food on smaller patches of land
in particular we can do vertical farming
as just one solution now in this case
electric vehicles lithium we don't know
if we can't make more and more efficient
electric vehicles via different
processes that these people haven't
thought of before
or that lithium can't be found in
various places that we didn't know of
before
we're not going to run out of lithium
anytime soon and even if we did
there's no physical theory that can put
a barrier on
us producing batteries that are even
better than the lithium ones we have
today
made of different materials who knows
what these people don't
i don't point is you can't prophecy you
cannot predict
the content of future knowledge but this
is this is what sustainability is it's a
fixed mindset it's thinking that the
technology available today
is the only technology that's ever going
to be available the knowledge available
today is the only knowledge that's ever
going to be available
it's a very parochial way of thinking
that the last
10 years of your personal career your
expert personal career
which includes reading articles from the
scientific american is the entire corpus
of human knowledge that's where it
started and that's where it finished as
if there was no history of progress
before that and there'll be no history
of progress
after this as well of course problems
will continue to be solved
okay let's keep going exponential growth
swiftly inevitably swamps anything in
fine arts apply for a virus that finite
resources the human population in the
context of the planet
it is its physical resource okay again
malthus again nothing but malthus
okay but the idea of finite supply
finite supply if only nothing about our
knowledge changes about how to use that
particular resource
how long will the coal last on planet
earth
we've had predictions for decades now
about how it's going to run out
at some point in the future but the
thing is the amount that we're using
seems to be
although in some sense it's increasing
in other senses decreasing because
people are transitioning away from it
so won't the coal last possibly forever
if we all transition away from it so how
was that a prediction in the first place
that was going to run out
at some point in the future same is true
for oil same is true for every single
resource
we tend to move from one resource to
another not necessarily because some
scientist comes along and says it's
going to run out but because we find
something
better something more efficient to use
in the case of coal
a lot of people are now using natural
gas we don't need to get into the
debates
about it but the point is that people
find other resources
a good reason to change from one
resource to another is because it's more
efficient and cheaper
to use that other resource but right now
the
marxist communist collectivist
socialists of the world want us to
artificially move from one to another
why not because that other resource is
better because they want to slow
down progress they want to impose
regulations on people
why because they're fixated on control
and one way of being fixated on control
is
through the lens through the the the
mechanism
of environmentalism environmentalism is
a great way of being able to say
the catastrophe is coming we need
control right now you all need to do
what you're told
otherwise the world is going to end move
from this resource to that resource
they remain in charge telling you that
they're looking after your best
interests
they're not they're putting artificial
dampeners
on growth and wealth creation let's keep
going
the inescapable inference is that it is
essentially impossible to decouple
material use from economic growth and
that is exactly what has transpired
weed when at all 2015 did a careful
accounting material footprint including
those embedded in international trade
for several nations
in the 1990 to 2008 period covered by
the study no country achieved a plan
that deliberate economy-wide decoupling
for a sustained length of time claims by
the global north to the contrary
concealed the substantial offshoring of
its production the associated ecological
devastation to the global south
everyone has been getting richer
everyone
on planet earth has been getting richer
over time
the number of people starving today are
far
far fewer than have ever been before
people in the most
destitute poorest nations of the world
people
with whom you would not wish to swap
places have smartphones
they have access to information like
never before
because people have used resources rare
earth minerals and
lots of energy in order to create the
technology that gives them access to all
of this knowledge
that enables them to improve themselves
and potentially
to make it into the west to make it into
the united states to canada
great britain throughout europe to
australia to various other places where
they can improve their lives
it's only only by this
economic progress that we can hope
that improvements will continue that
progress will continue
the ecology the ecological argument
the ecology the forests of the world
have never been in a better position
they've never been in a better position
they are being protected from natural
wildfires more than they ever have
because people are putting them out
and insofar as we are destroying some
for farmland the amount of farmland over
time that needs to be created is
decreasing as i said knowledge makes it
more economical
to create more food out of a smaller and
smaller area
and support more and more people okay
i'm skipping a paragraph and then they
say what is sustainability
these observations lead us to a natural
minimum condition for sustainability
all resource use curves must be
simultaneously flatlined
and all pollution curves simultaneously
extinguished
it is this resource perspective that
allows us to see why evs may help offset
carbon emissions
yet remain utterly unsustainable under
the limitless growth
growth paradigm okay well that whatever
that's nonsense
i don't understand what that's not an
answer to what sustainability is
this idea that all pollution curves must
be simultaneously extinct
we have to get rid of all pollution well
i thought these people were physicists
okay this this is
almost a consequence of the second law
of thermodynamics no process can be
perfectly efficient there's going to be
waste
even in the form of heat is heat not a
form of pollution are we
artificially heating the planet is that
what isn't that what they're concerned
about
so we need you existing causes
pollution as for all resource curves
must be simultaneously flatlined no no
you try and use only the same amount of
resources over time
then that means that you're not
improving you're literally flatlining
you're not creating anything new which
includes knowledge by the way
okay you're going to just have this we
can't remain in stasis
stasis means you're going to go
backwards because you're going to
encounter a problem
that you haven't encountered before and
you won't be able to solve it
because you won't have enough wealth
technology or knowledge in order to do
so
the only way to prepare for the unknown
future
is to continually rapidly create more
knowledge and that requires more
technology and that requires more wealth
and that requires the use of more
resources and that requires more energy
this is not some crazy theory this is
simple logic
it's simple logic the knowledge economy
is fueled by fuel by energy
first law of thermodynamics first law of
thermodynamics can't get out more energy
than what we put in
okay let's keep going the real question
this is titled
we have argued that the inexorable link
between material consumption and gdp
makes the infinite growth paradigm
incompatible with sustaining ecological
integrity
forget the science and the arguments
the english is just terrible okay
thus while evs constitute a partial
answer to the climate question within
the current paradigm that will only
exacerbate the larger anthropocentric
crises connected to unsustainable
resource consumption
it's not unsustainable the only thing
that's unsustainable is not
consuming resources to reduce the the
consumption
of resources that's unsustainable that
really is unsustainable that means that
human civilization will go backwards
that means we'll be unable
to deal with the problems of tomorrow we
won't have the technology
we won't have the power the wealth in
order to solve the problems of tomorrow
the infinite growth paradigm is just
okay
let's put it into more simple terms the
infinite growth paradigm simply means
unbounded progress
that's what that means we just need to
keep on solving the problems of the
future and in order to do that we have
to keep on growing
it's the only option if we are to shrink
in number as people
the number of creative entities that
exist on this planet will decrease
the number of solutions therefore that
we're going to be able to produce
because
each person only has a finite amount of
creative
output that they can have that they can
produce
is going to reduce in lock step with
that
we need to increase the population we
need to increase the amount of resources
that we're using
we need to increase the amount of energy
that we're using overall
we can be more efficient about it over
time but we want to spread out from this
planet as i keep on saying
now this might not need to happen for
millennia hence
but if people succeed at this argument
now there will be no people millennial
hence
we will have gone extinct if i seem
passionate it's because
this is the argument of our age if these
people win because they've come close
before
don't mistake it these people came close
in the second world war
to winning the argument these people
have come close again
and again and again it's all the same
it's tribal
collective tyrannical okay the ancient
tribes that wandered the african
wilderness
tribal replaced by a feudal system
a collective idea where there was one
person at the top and everyone else was
more or less equal beneath them okay we
had some barons we had some ranks but
the overwhelming majority of people were
serfs and then we had the idea of
codifying this kind of idea in
marxist ideas okay where where we needed
a central committee we need some sort of
central committee that is in charge
and then everyone else is completely
equal these are all basically logically
equivalent
a couple of people at the top and every
one of the
chiefs the kings or the commissars
and everyone else equal beneath them we
we can't go back to this this has been
the
to the ruination of civilizations prior
to this one it's a shame that
many of us have to devote our
intellectual efforts to defending a
thesis
which is so obviously correct against
some that is so obviously false
wars have been fought and won
for civilization for progress
for peace prosperity wealth
and technological improvement that's in
part what the second world war was about
among other things
among other things those people we were
fighting against
wanted stasis these people want stasis
they don't call it status they call it
sustainability now but it's the same
idea
they want things to remain the same they
want everyone to be the same to be
equal forced equality okay let's keep
going
we'll go past their graphs
they're malthusian graphs okay
unsustainable resource use going up
there
why well why can't we just keep we're
not staying on planet earth
okay and by the way the amount of planet
earth that currently we occupy
is such a tiny fraction of a percentage
get in an aeroplane sometime and have a
look out the window and you'll see that
cities are tiny specks on this the face
of this planet so much of it is just
uninhabited and unused by the way
there's so many resources yet to be used
pollution over time oh that's scary
isn't it yeah
resource use that's sustainable
pollution decreasing to zero well look
no one complains about pollution going
down sure
let's have the pollution going down no
problem but of course
once we get rid of one kind of pollution
there'll be another kind of pollution
that people complain about you know the
in the industrial revolution air quality
was so much worse in london than what it
is today
and yet we're producing more than ever
so we've we've gone from one kind of
pollution to another kind of pollution
the invisible sort of comp
pollution isn't that better okay and
maybe we'll get rid of that as well and
then we'll have a different kind of
pollution people won't stop complaining
of course
whatever the next kind of pollution is
they'll they'll keep on complaining
about it
oh i've come to the end of the article
but i need to go back
there's just this one we we forgot to
click on this the real question is how
do we transition to
alternative economic paradigms so that
that that's really what we're getting at
here this scientific american
the scientists from the scientific
american which i would say is not
scientific none of this has been
scientific
none of it it's all been an economic
appeal
for stasis for not solving problems for
going backwards and in fact attacking
their own kind attacking
other environmentalists for not being
pure enough in some way that we're
the that none of this is good enough
that's basically what we're saying here
isn't it
what we're saying is that your electric
vehicles
and your recycling and all that great
environmental stuff that you do
that's not enough you know what you need
let's click here what you need
is to be against affluence that's what
you need
scientist warning on affluence we need
to be against rich people
we've heard that before haven't we
they're often the first to go
we know who comes next we know who is
also in that
group but let's not hide it okay they're
coming for
affluence they're coming for wealth
they're coming for rich people these are
these are the people that have always
started the wars these are the people
that have demanded
that that things be confiscated from
those who have
they don't understand economics these
people are utterly economic illiterate
okay the previous article from
the scientific american it just wreaks
with
complete ignorance of of of any aspect
of how the economy might run of how
progress works
i want to say to them keep your beak out
of other people's business
it's like people who argue about oh
there was this there was
it was like this very recently this
complaint i think
what was it on the bbc or something this
whole thing about
amazon produces too much waste i think
it was in america actually the amazon
amazon the company the corporation
destroys too many products as
people chiming in saying this is
terrible this is off what's it got to do
with anyone
it's amazon's property they can do with
it what they like
it's logically equivalent to the grocery
store your local grocery store
throwing out the unwanted produce at the
end of the day that that otherwise is
going to go off by tomorrow
people say why don't they give it away
they don't give it away because they
want people to buy it tomorrow
okay it is the sign of a healthy society
they've got too much
and so it gets thrown out it gets thrown
into the bin yo why don't they do this
why don't
why doesn't the local kebab shop as i
argued
just give away the kebabs at the end of
the night that they otherwise
would have because they they can't
because the
local kebab shop doesn't know precisely
precisely you know down to the final
kebab
exactly how much tomato and lettuce and
lamb and bread
that they need for each and every day so
they buy a little bit more than what
they need
and throw away some at the end of the
day why don't they just give it they
don't give it away because eventually
the people in the community will realize
well they're just giving kebabs away at
the end of the day let's just wait until
the end of the day and we'll get a free
one we won't buy one
that would be a terrible business model
no so they
purchase a little bit more than what
they need and make just the right amount
of profit usually just a tiny amount of
profit by the way
and this this is true for almost every
single business
their profit margins are extremely tiny
now as a proportion i mean is a
proportion of the total revenue
okay so that the local kebab shop takes
in in one day
two thousand dollars but their costs
electricity labor food
might be one thousand nine hundred
they've got this tiny profit margin a
hundred dollars for the owner to go home
with
and pay his own personal bills with
something like that and maybe the local
grocery store it's a bit more than that
maybe amazon it's a bit more than that
again okay
they seem to have high profits but as an
overall proportion of the revenue
not that great although with amazon of
course they've got
lots and lots of smart people lots and
lots of technology trying to refine
precisely how much they need but again
they can't predict
perfectly perfectly how much
of any particular good they need to
produce or to buy
so sometimes they need to destroy some
they can't get it exactly right they
don't want to go under they don't want
to produce
insufficient amounts because they're not
making as much money as they otherwise
would have
but they can't get it exactly right so
some stuff needs to be destroyed
whatever the case i'm not going to get
involved in discussions with the local
kebab store owner
about why they're throwing out a couple
of tomatoes at the end of the evening
nor my local supermarket about why
they're throwing out food either i don't
know
i don't have the relevant knowledge
that's the whole point you need to have
knowledge in that particular area this
is an area of expertise
the finance is an area of expertise
economics and area expertise
running a kebab shop is an area of
expertise running amazon is an area of
expertise
why people in the general public feel
like they have to
insert their opinion into how these
businesses should run
i don't know it is precisely equivalent
to contacting the local urologist
and asking them why the number of
syringes in their bin happens to be the
number that it is
or the number of tissues dirty tissues
happens to be what it is
you don't know you've got no clue about
what goes on inside that urological
surgery
the urologist does the nurses do they're
the relevant experts
anyway i'm not going to read through
this entire thing but just to make us
aware that
that nature this is one of the most
prestigious scientific journals
on the planet is producing articles
which are op-eds these are op-eds okay
it's to be fair okay it's called
perspective
but why why why we why have we got an
opinion piece on
economics these people don't know
economics
abstract for over half a century
worldwide growth and affluence has
continuously increased
resource use well firstly isn't that a
wonderful thing worldwide growth and
affluence that's great
and by the way it's for everyone it's
for everyone yes some people have gotten
more wealthy than others
what's the alternative to that not
everyone can get equally but we won't go
down that road okay i've got my
cosmological economics have a look at
that one
it's not bad that there is inequality in
the world it simply isn't bad
you can imagine situations where the
inequality gets way worse
we can imagine a world where the richest
people
on the planet well actually no on the
planet in the galaxy
which people in the galaxy own entire
planets
they have 10 to the power of 50 and the
poorest people the poorest people only
own uh entire islands on those planets
and they're merely trillionaires and
they sail around
those planets on their on their
expensive yachts
we can imagine a situation like that
worse inequality
but everyone's better no one dies of
disease and catastrophe and whatever
we're just solving our
interesting creative better problems of
the future so inequality is not a bad
thing anyway
and affluence is certainly not a bad
thing it's it's the very
thing that enables people to solve
problems is wealth
another word affluence okay affluence
has continually increased resource use
and pollutant emissions far more rapidly
than have been reduced through better
technology
what we've increased
pollutant well to some extent yeah but
not really like i mean again the
industrial revolution in london
the air quality was way way way worse
but now there are more people who are
richer so i guess overall in the entire
globe
there's been multiple industrial
revolutions and there continue to be
these technological revolutions which
are
creating a little bit of pollution but
the pollution well
the pollution isn't that bad let's just
face it it's not
like or well there are places in china i
know okay and
place in africa which haven't got to the
level of technology that we have but if
we can get them there
then their skies will be clear as well
they'll have
clean air as well and then everyone can
just worry about the invisible carbon
dioxide
the effects of that okay fine we can
extract the carbon dioxide out of the
atmosphere if that's what people are
worried about we can get
carbon sequestration going we can get
more plants and so on and so forth okay
let's just read the rest of this
abstract we're definitely not going to
read the entire thing the affluent
citizens of the world are responsible
for most environmental impacts and
essential to any
future prospect of retreating to safer
environmental conditions we summarise
the evidence and present possible
solution approaches marxism any
transition towards sustainability can
only be effective if far-reaching
lifestyle changes
authoritarianism tyranny okay they're
going to tell you what to do
complement technological advancements in
other words yeah technology is not good
enough
we need to control you we need to be the
authorities
to take away some of your wealth and to
regulate what you're going to do with
your life okay we're going to tell you
what to do
moment to moment however existing
societies
economies and cultures incite
consumption expansion
and the structural imperative for growth
in competitive market economies
inhibits necessary societal change
necessary societal change
the the great fear with these people is
of course they
think they know what's best for everyone
for the entire world
and they they rely on the authority the
purported the supposed authority of
science
in order to do this they write in
journals like nature
they say we are scientists we are
warning you recent scientist warnings as
the introduction
scientists are just people and as we can
see
often completely and utterly
historically illiterate
economically illiterate yes
physicists are some of the smartest
people in the world
but many of them not all many of them
should stick to physics
okay just as you know
you're on brooke someone i love stick to
finance whenever he comments on physics
he gets it wrong
and i sort of mentally switch off and
you don't know what you're talking about
but
it's fine and i think that sometimes if
you don't take an interest in a certain
subject
try not to opine on it i take a casual
interest in a
in the in the economy in finance because
i listen to euron brooke amongst other
things and i read
thomas soul and i read various other
books but i'm not going to insert myself
in a debate about
who was the worst of the roman emperors
not my area of expertise i imagine that
there's actually a
good debate to be had there i am not a
historian
there are areas of expertise but why
certain people think that they should
write long
[Laughter]
long pieces about things they clearly
don't know about i don't know
let's just skip all the argument and
skip to the conclusion because you know
this has gone on this rant has gone on
for long enough
um super affluent so they're very very
worried about the rich this is the
the politics of envy of course politics
of envy
everyone can become affluent everyone
can okay a
post-capitalist economy in other words
social it's been tried before
capitalism is the new thing can we just
say that it's the new theory
marxism communism socialism they're all
just
versions of tribalism collectivism okay
which has been tried
before it was tried on the african
savannah it was tried in medieval europe
with the king at the top okay and
basically just
making sure that everyone beneath him
got an equal amount
more or less okay his family and the
barons might have got a little bit more
but basically the overwhelming majority
of people got the same
okay just the same way that in north
korea now in the same way as in
china to a lesser extent but still there
is a ruling class and then there's
everyone else is equal okay do we want
everyone else to be no
we don't want everyone else equal we
want this new idea the new idea is
everyone gets to pursue their own
happiness and their own wealth to the
extent that they want to and can
to the extent that they're willing to
work hard
work late hours be creative do stuff
that they want
okay and if they don't want to then they
don't get rewarded
this is the it's simply a the reality of
the world
and at this point i have to say because
i did not grow up in a wealthy family i
did not
okay i got through university myself by
working hard myself to pay
my way through university okay i worked
hard to do that
it's terrible that i have to say that
but of course people come at you
when you declare these kind of things
when you when you
when you say things like this when you
say that what it takes is it is
what it takes is hard work and
creativity but that is what
it takes that is what it takes the only
alternative is to
rely on others yeah that's the only
other alternative
okay we don't really have a section
called conclusion here it says
research on governance how to make the
world a better place according to
nature replace gdp as a measure of
prosperity okay who cares about that
empower people and strengthen
participation in democratic processes
stronger local governments i don't mind
stronger local governance yeah take a
take away the
the power from the you know centralized
national governments
happy with that design governance
institutions to allow for social
experiments engagement and innovation
sounds all nice
this could be trialled through organized
or through citizen assemblies or juries
how about we just stick with democracy
an easy way of
removing the rulers and policies that we
don't like
as is to matter by extinction rebellion
extinction
oh my goodness these are these
environmental terrorists
and already practiced by transition
initiative okay so they've gone off
so it seems like what they're arguing
for there
is not really democracy not really
more democratic processes but
entrenching
certain leaders and certain ideas such
that
they cannot possibly be removed citizen
assemblies
or juries okay whenever you hear
something like that you hear
people who haven't been elected and
therefore cannot be removed by election
next third strengthen equality and
redistribution aha
through suitable taxation policies okay
we need more tax
basic income okay yes universal basic
income
and job guarantees in other words job
guarantees all right so you get a
guaranteed job
even if you're not willing to do
anything guaranteed jobs so even if you
don't work hard
guaranteed job you can sit there on your
butt
not do anything but your job is
guaranteed therefore your income is
guaranteed you don't have to try hard
this is what happens in north korea by
the way it's what always happens that
people have no motivation to do anything
because they know
that the harder they work they're not
going to get rewarded anymore they get
rewarded exactly the same as the guy
sitting next to him who's not trying
hard
they think that everyone's going to try
hard in such an economy they're not
they're not why would they they're not
going to get any more reward
expanding public services okay this is
all socialism rolling back neo-liberal
reforms
e.g is part of a green new deal
my goodness okay stronger regulation
might be needed okay to ban certain
products
ecologically destructive industries okay
so it's just all authoritarianism
under the guise of environmentalism to
take away
people's wealth prosperity
motivation to work motivation to be
creative
fourth the transformation of economic
systems can be supported with innovative
business models no it can't be there's
two things don't work together you're
not going to get an innovative business
with a job guarantee encourage sharing
and giving economies based on
corporation communities and localized
economy what is it's like it's written
by
i'm sorry but you know a a a
group of first-year university students
and finally capacity building knowledge
transfer and education including media
and advertising to support
local sufficient okay
it's it makes one quite emotional
actually
to read this it's just so sad that
that the great institutions great
journals
like nature magazines like the the
scientific american
are going down this road this is what
people are reading
when i was growing up i don't know that
this was in the scientific american
or nature they weren't focused on
economics
why why why well i kind of know i mean i
i pay attention to what's said in the
physics community and i want to pick on
the physics community
the astrophysics community i talk to
some of these people they're marxists
they're they're socialists they
they love socialist policies and one of
the reasons is i guess
governments fund their research
so they need to be very very
pro-government they need to be very very
pro-the idea that everyone else will
support them
the scientists so scientists certain
scientists have a vested interest in
this
this is why we need desperately need new
funding models for science
and it's something away from the
universities away from the traditional
way of government funding this stuff
because
so long as the the scientists keep
getting government funding
almost all their funding comes from
government they're going to write
articles like this they're going to try
and encourage everyone else to try and
let's face indoctrinate
everyone else with propaganda so that
they can continue to
get money via this route via arguing
that
the catastrophe is coming the looming
catastrophe is coming number one
the only people that can save you from
the looming catastrophe are the
scientists
so you better give them more money you
better make society more egalitarian
we need scientists we need scientists to
be working on creative stuff creative
fundamental things
and it's time that we started to really
question
the people who are arguing for tired old
ideas
like socialism i'm not going to change
the podcast into being ranty about
socialism and environmentalism but one
gets
completely fed up with reading
this sort of nonsense from what is
supposed to be
one of the most reputable scientific
magazines in the world
and one of the most reputable scientific
journals in the world
it's disgraceful